Design document on result records (#6167)
datalad/datalad: docs/source/design/result_records.rst

entity that has no meaningful relation to the local file system (e.g., a URL to
be downloaded), to ``path`` value should be determined with respect to the
potential impact of the result on any local entity (e.g., a URL downloaded
to a local file path, a local dataset modified based on remote information).

``status``
----------

This field indicates the nature of a result in terms of four categories, identified
by a string label.

- ``ok``: a standard, to-be-expected result
- ``notneeded``: an operation that was requested, but found to be unnecessary
  in order to achieve a desired goal
- ``impossible``: a requested operation cannot be performed, possibly because
  its preconditions are not met
- ``error``: an error occurred while performing an operation

Based on the ``status`` field, a result is categorized into *success* (``ok``,
``notneeded``) and *failure* (``impossible``, ``error``). Depending on the
``on_failure`` parameterization of a command call, any failure-result emitted
by a command can lead to an ``IncompleteResultsError`` being raised on
command exit, or a non-zero exit code on the command line.

> 

Reviewer: In addition to raising errors, isn't it also "nothing" when we set ``on_failure='ignore'``? Could we maybe add the possible values that `on_failure` can take (sorry if I have missed them)?

Author: Will do, good point, thx!

- ``symlink``: a symbolic link
- ``key``: a git-annex key
- ``sibling``: a Dataset sibling or Git remote

``message``
-----------

A message providing additional human-readable information on the nature or
provenance of a result. Any non-``ok`` results *should* have a message providing
information on the rational of their status characterization.

A message can be a string or a tuple. In case of a tuple, the second item can
contain values for ``%``-expansion of the message string. Expansion is performed
only immediately prior to actually outputting the message, hence string formatting
runtime costs can be avoided this way, if a message is not actually shown.

``logger``
----------

If a result record has a ``message`` field, then a given `Logger` instance
(typically from ``logging.getLogger()``) will be used to automatically log
this message. The log channel/level is determined based on
``datalad.log.result-level`` configuration setting. By default, this is
the ``debug`` level. When set to ``match-status`` the log level is determined
based on the ``status`` field of a result record:

- ``debug`` for ``'ok'``, and ``'notneeded'`` results
- ``warning`` for ``'impossible`` results

> - ``error`` for ``'impossible`` results

Author: Thx, it also has a quote too much. Will fix.

This feature should be used with care. Unconditional logging can lead to
confusing double-reporting when results rendered and also visibly logged.

``refds``
---------

This field can identify a path (using the same semantics and requirements as
the ``path`` field) to a reference dataset that represents the larger context
of an operation. For example, when recursively processing multiple files across
a number of subdatasets, a ``refds`` value may point to the common superdataset.
This value may influence, for example, how paths are rendered in user-output.

``parentds``
------------

This field can identify a path (using the same semantics and requirements as
the ``path`` field) to a dataset containing an entity.

``state``
---------

A string label categorizing the state of an entity. Common values are:

- ``clean``
- ``untracked``
- ``modified``
- ``deleted``
- ``absent``
- ``present``

``error-messages``
------------------

List of any error messages that were captured or produced while achieving a
result.

``exception``
-------------

> An exception that occurred while achieving the reported result.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A ``CapturedException`` that occurred while achieving the reported result. If provided, ``get_status_dict`` will fill in the ``exception_traceback`` field automatically.
```

Author: Is that true? It seems the code takes any exception. The feature is undocumented.

Reviewer 2: Result rendering may take any, but `get_status_dict` doesn't. So, at least when taking advantage of that convenience feature `CapturedException` would be required.

Reviewer 2: FWIW: I'm fine with declaring that `get_status_dict` *should* be able to deal with any. However, that's defining current behavior as a bug and I'd argue it's still worth documenting that feature here.

Author: I have no desire to declare anything. I am documenting what I think I know is going on. It seems that this feature was exactly how I had it in mind and described it (added by @yarikoptic in https://github.com/datalad/datalad/commit/b737726673c4e47ad3e15d78654eb981146bbe79), but was silently changed (now restricted to `CapturedException`) by @bpoldrack with the recent https://github.com/datalad/datalad/commit/6d4f1ebb901010725b9dba4dd4d2e75af474dbfe.
